RTOG Tape Exchange Specification v4.00Specifications for Tape/Network Format for 
Exchange of Treatment Planning Information 
RTOG 3D QA Center
William Harms
RTOG 3D Quality Assurance Center
Washington University
510 South Kingshighway Blvd.
St. Louis, MO 63110
Version 4.00
12 October 1999
 
Please send suggestions and comments to:
Bill Harms
 
Based on AAPM Report #10 and as used and modified by the NCI Particle 
Intercomparison Contract, the NCI High Energy Photon External Beam Treatment 
Planning Contract, the NCI Electron External Beam Treatment Planning Contract, 
and the RTOG 3D QA Center. 



CONTENTS
0. PREFACE
1. REVISION HISTORY
2. INTRODUCTION
3. DISTRIBUTION MEDIA CONVENTIONS
  3.1 TAPE EXCHANGE 
  3.2 NETWORK EXCHANGE 
  3.3 DATA STORAGE 
    3.3.1 BINARY Data 
    3.3.2 ASCII Data 
    3.3.3 Null Characters 
4. DIRECTORY 
  4.1 Keywords For the Directory Header 
  4.2 Sample Entries in the Directory Header 
5. COMMENT 
  5.1 Keywords for Comments Used in Directory 
  5.2 Sample Entries In The Directory 
  5.3 Sample Image File 
6. CT SCAN, MRI AND ULTRASOUND IMAGES 
  6.1 Coordinate System and Scan Offsets 
  6.2 Keywords For Images Used in CT Scan Directory 
  6.3 Sample CT Scan Entries In The Directory 
  6.4 Sample Image of Data for CT Scan 
  6.5 Keywords For Images Used in MRI/US Directory 
  6.6 Sample MRI/US Entries In The Directory 
  6.7 Sample Image of Data for MRI/US 
7. STRUCTURES 
  7.1 Keywords For Images Used in Directory 
  7.2 Sample Entries in the Directory 
  7.3 Sample Image Data for Structure 
8. BEAM GEOMETRY 
  8.1 Data Contained in the Image File 
  8.2 Keywords for Images Used in Directory 
  8.3 Sample Entries in the Directory 
  8.4 Sample Image of Beam Geometry Data 
9. DIGITAL FILM IMAGES 
  9.1 Keywords for Imageds Used in Directory 
  9.2 Sample Entries in the Directory 
  9.3 Sample Image of Data for Digital Film 
10. DOSE DISTRIBUTIONS 
  10.1 Keywords For Images Used in Directory 
  10.2 Sample Entries in Directory 
  10.3 Sample Image of Text Data for Dose 
  10.4 Sample Image of Binary Data for Dose 
11. DOSE-VOLUME HISTOGRAMS 
  11.1 Keywords for Dose-Volume Histograms Used in Directory 
  11.2 Example Dose-Volume Histogram Directory Entries 
  11.3 Example Dose-Volume Histogram Image File 
12. SEED GEOMETRY 
  12.1 Keywords for Seed Geometry Used in Directory 
  12.2 Example Seed Geometry Directory Entries 
  12.3 Example Seed Geometry Image File 
 



0. PREFACE
This Tape/Network Format Specification, while initially based on AAPM Report 
#10, has been significantly altered to allow more information to be included in 
the data transfer. It was originally modified by the NCI Particle 
Intercomparison contract, then used in that form by the NCI High Energy Photon 
External Beam contract. The document was modified further for the NCI Electron 
External Beam contract. The modification in this version reflect further 
trimming of unused image types with the intent to add more image types that 
directly impact on exchange of treatment planning and treatment verification.
A significant modification was made with version 3.00 as it included several 
heretofore unsupported data image types. These new image types include beam 
geometries, digital film images, and dose-volume histograms. Additionally, 
several changes were made to dose distributions to remove ambiguities involving 
the submission of other than absolute dose.
With Version 3.10, an apparently ambiguous keyword was removed and more 
clarifying comments and examples were added. An additional keyword was added for 
beam geometry to identify the algorithm used for calculating doses from the 
beam. All of these additional keyword additions, or deletions, are optional in 
nature to maintain compatibility with Version 3.00. To simplify network exchange 
of these data files, the requirement for "buffered" data blocks is removed as an 
option (to be agreed upon by sending and receiving site). As many institutions 
are originally writing their files in this format and then post processing them 
to "block" them, this should come as a welcome change. This "unbuffered" 
submission is only available for electronic exchange of the data and the use of 
buffers will still be required for any tape media data exchanges.
Version 3.20 added an additional keyword for digital film images "Collimator 
Angle" (primarily DRR's without portal marking in the image) and one for beam 
geometry "Head In/Out". These were to clear up ambiguities and oversights in the 
previous version. DRR's are computed by two primary geometric methods, one 
removes the collimator angle from the transformation matrix used for computing 
the DRR and the other always has the edges of the image parallel to the 
collimators (the collimator angle is left in the transformation matrix). The 
"Collimator Angle" keyword identifies the method being used and is optional if 
the DRR edges are parallel to the unrotated collimator. The "Head In/Out" was 
added to resolve potential ambiguity in the couch angle wherein a 180 degree 
offset was added to the couch angle to signify a foot in treatment. If that 
patient is being treated with their feet to the gantry (prior to any couch 
rotation), this keyword must be used, otherwise, head in is assumed.
Changes were made in the document for Version 3.21 which mostly amounted to 
additional explanation of keywords and data inclusion. There were several 
keywords for Beam Geometry, Digital Films and Dose-Volume Histograms which were 
moved from the Required Keywords to Optional Keywords. This was primarily to 
simplify the directories by removing requirement on any data which was not 
necessary to interpreting the data provided in the file set.
As more institutions begin to participate in studies requiring the use of this 
data exchange specification, it is inevitable that further refinement and 
ambiguity resolution will have to be done. This is a living document and will be 
subject to many revisions over the next year or two until it is replaced with 
more robust and universal communication mechanisms such as DICOM 3.0.
Version 4.00 was created to provide for ultrasound guided permanent prostate 
seed implants.  Additional items were added in support of Peregrine and other 
projects.   Those which were added which are not supported by the 3D QA Center 
are identified as such in the text.



1. REVISION HISTORY
      Version Date Description 
      1.0 4/22/82 Preliminary draft. (Michael Goitein) 
      1.1 8/28/82 Substantially modified. All images in ACSII except CT scans 
      1.2 10/21/83 Intermediate update - never distributed. 
      2.1 12/27/83 Working version. Document clarified and reorganized. New 
      requirement that CT images be contiguous on tape in order of increasing 
      z-coordinate Explicit description of how null characters are to be 
      handled. (nulls not included in byte counts). 
      2.2 4/08/85 Revisions made in conjunction with Robert F. Curley: Add dose 
      examples Add text describing in words the data files for structures and 
      doses. Require "....." must not contain CR/LF Require all CT scans to be 
      square.
      Add a number of clarifying comments. 
      2.3 09/22/89 Remove annotations and code examples for ECWG report (Harms) 
      2.4 07/08/92 Remove additional information on annotations, cleaned up the 
      grammar, added variances relating to the amount of data on a tape 
      (multiple patients, buffer size, and tape density), added new "image" 
      types of MRI, Beam Geometry, and digital film images (i.e. DRR, on-line 
      images). (Harms) 
      2.5 06/29/93 Fixed errors in document pertaining to keywords "Maximum # of 
      scans" to "Maximum # scans" and "Scan type" to "Scanner type" (Harms) 
      2.51 07/09/93 Clean up language and add "Writer" as a Directory Header 
      entry (as it was inadvertantly left out from the original format) 
      3.00 1/10/94 Added Beam Geometry, Digital Film, DVH's and fractionation 
      information. Included moving appendices into appropriate chapters and 
      modified dose distributions to allow for fractionation information and to 
      clarify dose units. (Prostate Working Group, Bill Harms, Jonathan Jacky, 
      Jeff Lewis and James Balter). 
      3.10 6/10/94 Added more explanation and cleaned up some partial omissions. 
      Allowed unblocked data (for network transmission) if receiving site is 
      agreeable and removed "INTERCOMPARISON STANDARD #" as an ambiguous 
      keyword. Removed AAPM Report 10 as the standard to judge discrepancies in 
      the exchange format. 
      3.20 12/28/94 Added "Head In/Out" keyword to beam geometry and "Collimator 
      Angle" keyword to digital film images for DRR's. 
      3.21 3/8/95 Added clarifying discussion to many keywords and moved 
      unnecessary keywords from Required, to Optional. 
      3.22 4/17/97 Corrected error in MLC example. 
      3.30
      7/25/97Optional extensions added to Beam Geometry and Dose for support of 
      Peregrine communications and more succinct and explicit treatment plan 
      information exchange. Some additional clarification text was incorporated 
      based on comments by George Starckschall. The primary additions to Beam 
      Geometry are explicit compensating filter descriptions, a Machine ID 
      keyword (in addition to energy and modality), and Beam Weight and Weight 
      Units to allow for machine settings to be specified. The optional 
      additions to Dose allows for binary dose files (two's complement integer 
      with a scale factor) to reduce the size of dose image files.
      Following are links to the modified text for ease of locating. 
        ASCII restrictions 
        Date Format for Y2K 
        Coordinate System Clarification 
        Asymmetric Jaw Clarification 
        Compensating Filters 
        Additional Beam Geometry (Optional) Keywords 
        Digital Film Modification (Text) 
        Digital Film Modification (Keywords) 
        Dose Modification for Binary Data (Text) 
        Binary Dose Sample Description 
        Additional Dose Keywords (Optional) for Binary Data (Keywords) 
        DVH Data Format Clarification 

      4.00 Draft
      03/22/1999Changes made for Version 4.0 of this Exchange Specification were 
      motivated by the need to add prostate seed brachytherapy treatment 
      planning to the information supported by this exchange.  In order to make 
      use of the appropriate imaging modalities which are used for permanent 
      prostate seed implants, MRI and ultrasound (US) were added to the CT Scans 
      chapter and an additional file type was defined for Seed Plan 
      specification.
      One previously documented feature has been removed.  While the 
      Specification "officially" supported multiple patient data sets in a 
      single file set, no commercial or University systems being used for 
      patients enrolled in multi-institutional trials made use of this feature, 
      therefore, to simplify the implementation of reading and writing software, 
      this feature has been removed.  This allows the Case keyword to be used as 
      desired by the writing facility.  A suggestion would be to use the actual 
      patient registration number as the case number, but in order to maintain 
      backward compatibility with writing software, this is not going to become 
      a requirement at this time. 
      One additional change was to incorporate beam aperture definitions through 
      the use of a transmission table in addition to closed block and portal 
      contours.  This addition was made to facilitate the exchange of this 
      information with the Peregrine system and is not currently used, or 
      supported by the RTOG 3D QA Center for protocol patient data submissions.
      Following are links to the modified text for ease of locating. Also, note 
      that all added text is in this same color purple text to aid the reader.   
      Incorrect compensating filter examples were also corrected.
        Case number modification 
        Patient Coordinate system clarification for CT, MRI, and Ultrasound 
        image sets 
        MRI and Ultrasound image files 
        Warning about MLC Specification 
        Transmission Map Information (in lieu of block or MLC coordinate 
        specification) 
        Compensating filter example data correction 
        Seed Geometry 

      4.00
      10/12/1999Changes made from the Draft Version 4.0 of this Exchange 
      Specification were the result of the implementation workshop in September, 
      1999 where most of the brachytherapy developers provided input into items 
      requiring correction or adjustment.   These changes generally added 
      clarification to the document, but in some cases, removed some of the 
      draft items or added items which would not result in legacy code failing.
      The optional keyword for Seed Geometry, "Registered" has been removed and 
      replaced with the implicit assumption that if any CT/MR/US images are 
      included in the same file set as one (or more) Seed Geometry files, the 
      seeds are registered with the included images.
      Following are links to the modified text for ease of locating. Also, note 
      that all added text is in this same color purple text to aid the reader.
        Seed Geometry file set order recommendations 
        CT/MR/US coordinate system clarification for offsets 
        Secondary capture as source of CT/MR/US images 
        Several, formerly required, maximum counts made optional for STRUCTURES 
        Dose # and Dose Type made optional 
        Plan ID of Origin added to DOSE to connect seed geometry and dose 
        distribution 
        Seed-Image Registration Requirements 
       



2. INTRODUCTION
The format proposed follows the recommendations of the AAPM for digital image 
transfer, published as AAPM report no. 10, "A Standard Format for Digital Image 
Exchange" (obtainable from: AAPM, One Physics Ellipse, College Park, MD 20740). 
The description in this document assumes the reader's familiarity with AAPM 
Report #10. The tape format described in this document is intended to comply 
with all aspects of AAPM Report #10. Some aspects of that report are reiterated 
here as a help to the reader. However, in the event of a real or apparent 
discrepancy, AAPM Report #10 shall give way to this document. This document 
extends the scope of AAPM report #10 by including data structures other than CT 
scans or comparable images. 
Seven types of files (termed images in the AAPM standard) are supported (in 
addition to the Directory): Comments; CT scans; Structures (target volumes, 
external contours, normal critical structures, etc.); Beam Geometry's; Dose 
distributions; Digital Film Images and Dose-Volume Histograms. No more than one 
case can be transmitted on one tape (or network file data set). The data shall 
be placed on tape in the following order, case by case.
      Comments case 1 

      Scans (CT, MRI, US)case 1 

      Structures case 1 

      Orphan Digital Film Images case 1

      Beam Geometry's case 1 (plan 1) 

      Digital Film Images case 1 (plan 1) 

      Doses case 1 (plan 1) 

      Dose-Volume Hist. case 1 (plan 1) 

      Beam Geometry's case 1 (plan 2) 

      Digital Film Images case 1 (plan 2) 

      Doses case 1 (plan 2) 

      Dose-Volume Hist. case 1 (plan 2) 

      ......................... ................. 

      Beam Geometry's case 1 (plan n) 

      Digital Film Images case 1 (plan n) 

      Doses case 1 (plan n) 

      Dose-Volume Hist. case 1 (plan n) 

      etc. 

Not all data is required in this order. For instance, if beam geometry's and 
digital film images are not submitted with the corresponding doses and 
dose-volume histograms, the non-existent data will just be left out of the data 
to be transmitted. An example of such an order would be:
      Scans case 1 

      Structures case 1 

      Doses case 1 (plan 1) 

      Dose-Volume Hist. case 1 (plan 1) 

      Doses case 1 (plan 2) 

      Dose-Volume Hist. case 1 (plan 2) 

      ......................... ................. 

      Doses case 1 (plan n) 

      Dose-Volume Hist. case 1 (plan n) 

      etc. 

Seed Geometry and Beam Geometry are mutually exclusive and both may not be 
contained in a single file set.  In the case of a file set containing Seed 
Geometry, the following demonstrates the order of the files:
      Scans (CT/MR/US)case 1 

      Structures case 1 

      Seed Geometry (one set of seeds)case 1 (plan 1) 

      Doses case 1 (plan 1) 

      Dose-Volume Histograms case 1 (plan 1) 

      Seed Geometry (second set of seeds in same implant)case 1 (plan 2) 

      Doses case 1 (plan 2) 

      Dose-Volume Histograms case 1 (plan 2) 

      etc. 

If multiple Seed Geometry files are contained within a given file set, it is 
assumed that they represent different activity and/or model seeds used in the 
same implant.
Examples of a directory header and some (non-binary) images are included in the 
following chapters.
There are two distinct coordinate systems used by this Specification. One is for 
patient data which is defined in Chapter 6. The other is for the beam aperture 
specification which is oriented in a "beam's-eye view" manner in which aperture 
coordinates are 2D coordinates with a constant third coordinate relative to 
distance from beam source and is defined in Chapter 8.



3. DISTRIBUTION MEDIA CONVENTIONS
3.1 TAPE EXCHANGE 
A 9-track tape with a density of 1600 bpi shall be the default medium used for 
data exchange. However, if the site to receive the tape agrees to higher 
density, and/or a different type of physical tape, it shall be allowed. Tapes 
shall be UNLABELED to facilitate intercommunication between different 
manufacturer's computers. Multi-volume tapes should not be used unless necessary 
to transmit a single case. For tapes which can have their densities changed, the 
tape must be clearly labeled and the used density agreed to by the receiving 
institution.
All data on the tape shall be written in fixed length buffers. The default 
buffer size is 2048 bytes, but if the receiving site agrees to a different size 
buffer, it is allowed and should be clearly marked on the tape. As many buffers 
are written as are required to transmit the data, unused bytes (such as the 
unused remaining bytes of the last buffer of an image) shall be filled with NULL 
characters. No text strings should be broken across buffer boundaries. If an 
entire string will not fit into the current buffer, the end of the buffer should 
be NULL'ed out and the string put into the next buffer.
Single end-of-file marks separate the directory file from the first "image" file 
and succeeding image files from one another. Two end-of-file marks in succession 
terminate the tape. On media other than 9-track tape, these separation 
requirements may not be valid and adjustments may need to be made.
3.2 NETWORK EXCHANGE 
If both the sending and receiving site have network access to one another, this 
data may be sent as individual files across the network. The means of such 
transfer are left for the sending and receiving institutions to work out among 
themselves. Recent experience has shown that anonymous ftp, in binary mode, is a 
practical method of such data transfer where the files' names have a numeric 
identifier in their names so that the order is obvious for processing (the 
author's preference is "aapm0000", "aapm0001", etc.). However, anonymous ftp 
might present patient record confidentiality problems. This could require the 
submitting institution(s) to have distinct login accounts on the receiving 
machine(s) which segregate them from other institutions data submissions and 
shield the data they submit from others.
For network exchange of data, if the receiving site agrees, the data may be sent 
in files of a single buffer the size of the data file. The fixed length buffer 
requirement may be disregarded in this case. However, for media exchange of 
data, in the interest of preventing any possible hardware/software 
incompatibility, fixed buffers are still REQUIRED. This is a change for Version 
3.10.
3.3 DATA STORAGE 
Two types of data can be stored on tape: BINARY data, for CT scans and digital 
film images; and ASCII character strings (terminated with <CR/LF>) for 
everything else (including the directory file). The two types of data may NOT be 
mixed within any given file.
3.3.1 BINARY Data 
For each binary datum which occupies 2 bytes of the buffer, in compliance with 
the AAPM standard, the most significant byte is required to be first. Thus VMS, 
and similar byte order, machines will need to byte-swap both when writing and 
when reading a tape, for instance. For the unsigned byte data, the order is 
obvious.
3.3.2 ASCII Data 
ASCII data may appear in one of two contexts: In the directory header where the 
data is always in the form of keyword/value pairs (see below); and in images 
(such as structure definitions or dose distributions) - where the format depends 
on the data type, but is generally largely a sequence of numeric fields (i.e. 
ASCII strings defining real or integer numbers as appropriate). In either 
context the following rules apply.
Each entry of ASCII text may be from 1 to 80 bytes in length (excluding null 
bytes which are ignored) and must be terminated by a carriage-return/line-feed 
(CR/LF) sequence (not included in the 80 byte limit). Embedded spaces, tabs and 
null characters should not be included within numeric fields (but may precede or 
follow them) and elsewhere (as in keywords) they are to be ignored. Blank lines 
(CR/LF/CR/LF) are to be ignored in the parsing of these files. To permit 
comments in numeric fields (in order to make a printed file more interpretable), 
any text enclosed in double quotation marks (") is to be ignored. Text between 
quotation marks may not include a CR/LF string.
When specifying numeric data, a comma/space (comma followed by a space) sequence 
is an acceptable field delimiter as well as the CR/LF sequence. ADD1: Note, 
however, that no text line may end with a comma/space/CR/LF sequence as the 
comma/space implies further meaningful text in the line. No text string may 
bridge multiple buffers, if buffered exchange is selected or required. While the 
specification technically allows it, it generally presents implementation 
problems and shall not be supported.
3.3.3 NULL Characters 
Unused elements of the last buffer of a binary image (if any) are ignored. They 
may be filled with zeros.
Null characters may occur anywhere within ASCII Text (except in the middle of a 
numeric field) and are to be ignored. Null characters are not counted in any per 
line byte count limit. Generally, it is expected that null characters will be 
used to pad out at least the final buffer of an image, and should be used to pad 
out the final elements of intermediate buffers to avoid having text cross buffer 
boundaries. Only binary data may cross buffer boundaries.



4. DIRECTORY 
The first file is a directory file, written entirely in ASCII characters. The 
directory consists entirely of Keyword/Value pairs - as described in the AAPM 
standard specification and in this document. At present no files or "images" 
other than the directory contain keyword/value sequences. Keywords and values 
are case and space insensitive. For instance:
 Somewhat longer keyword :=
is equivalent to:
 SOMEWHAT      LONGER          KeywoRd :=.
The first entries in the directory pertain to the entire tape and constitute the 
"directory header". Keywords used in the directory header are given in the 
following section. The directory header is followed by sequences of keywords 
which relate to individual images. By convention the first such keyword shall be 
"Image #", and all keywords relating to an image should follow that "Image #" 
specification and should precede the next "Image #" occurrence.
Note that "Image #" is a misnomer introduced by the AAPM format for tape 
exchange. It really just identified the position of the file on the tape. 
However, it does reference the sequence number of the associated file for 
network transferred data files. The first file is the directory (perhaps best 
thought of as file number 0), and subsequent files are termed "images" and 
assigned consecutive numbers starting from 1. In the present case, these 
"images" may in fact be any one of: Comments, CT scans, Structures, Beam 
Geometry's, Digital Film Images, Dose Distributions and DVH's.
Spaces, tabs and null characters are to be ignored in keywords. Alphabetic 
characters may be in upper or lower case and, in interpreting strings of 
characters as keywords (program implementation), all lower case characters may 
be replaced by their upper (or lower) case equivalents. In order to remove a 
potential source of confusion, the character strings "number" and "#" in 
keywords are to be everywhere considered interchangeable and MUST have numeric 
values.
In conformity with the AAPM standard, directory entries are made in the format:
    Keyword :=  value
In this context only one "value" can follow the "=". Thus a mixed expression 
such as "size : = 1.5 cm" is illegal. There is to be no character (null, space, 
or otherwise) between the ":" and the "=".
In order to make tape listings somewhat more readable, it is permissible (indeed 
encouraged) to include tabs to make successive entries line up, as:
    Keyword                 :=    STRUCTURES
    Somewhat longer keyword :=    18
    Next keyword            :=    10.65

The AAPM tape format virtually mandates a two-pass approach - that is, two 
passes have to be made through the data to be transferred: the first in order to 
build up and write out the entire directory; the second in order to write out 
the underlying data to tape. This may be avoided if the files are built on disk 
first and the physical writing of the tape subsequent to the completion of all 
data files and the directory being written to disk. Network transfer will 
involve building the files on disk with the directory file being written to disk 
last (even though it has a smaller file number, i.e. 0).
4.1 Keywords for the Directory Header 
Required Keywords
    Tape standard # :=    4.00  (version # of this standard from title page)
    Institution     :=    Name of submitting institution
    Date created    :=    Date tape written in AAPM format (dd, mm, yyyy)
    Writer          :=    Name of person responsible for writing tape

These entries must be the first entries in the directory.
Optional Keywords
    Intercomparison standard # :=   version # of this standard from title
                                    page (4.00) this keyword is maintained
                                    only for compatibility and its' use is
                                    not recommended

Format of data in the image:
No image is associated with the directory header. 
4.2 Sample Entries in the Directory Header 
    Tape standard # :=    4.00
    Institution     :=    MIR
    Date created    :=    22, 03, 1999
    Writer          :=    Bill Harms

The date format used for all dates specified in a directory for a data exchange 
file set must be in the format DD, MM, YY[YY], where DD is the day of the month 
(one or two digits are allowed), MM is the month of the year (one or two digits 
are allowed and 1-January, 2-February, etc.), and YY is the last two digits of 
the year with an implied 1900 added to it. Four digits may be used for the year 
for Y2K compliance (and must be used after 12/31/1999).
Note that a date may be legal in format, but due to the time of any given month 
in which the date is generated, it may be incorrect. For instance, if a file set 
is generated on the 9th of February 1995, the date string should be 9, 2, 95. 
However, 2, 9, 1995 is a legitimately formatted date, but is incorrect. This 
should be carefully reviewed during implementation as it is a frequent mistake.
There are four keywords which are common to all image files (regardless of the 
image file content). These keywords must be used for all image files and must be 
in the order specified for the proper implementation of the data exchange 
format.
Required Keywords
    Image #      :=    actual image (file) number
    Image type   :=    COMMENT, CT SCAN, MRI, ULTRASOUND, STRUCTURE, 
                       BEAM GEOMETRY, DIGITAL FILM, DOSE, 
                       SEED GEOMETRY, or DOSE VOLUME HISTOGRAM
    Case #       :=    1 for first case(optionally protocol case #)
    Patient name :=    patient identifier

The Image # is the ordinal number of the data file being referenced. In the case 
of tape being used as the transport medium, this number is the order in which 
the files are found on the tape in which the first file is the directory file 
and is considered file number zero (0). Therefore the first data file would be 
1, the second, 2, etc. In the case of a network medium of exchange, these number 
must be explicitly represented in the file names attached to the individual 
files. Again, the directory file is file zero (0).
The Image type is used to identify the data contained in the associated image 
file. With the exception of CT SCAN, MRI, ULTRASOUND, DIGITAL FILM and binary 
dose files (optional) all data files are in ASCII format.
The Case # identifies the ordinal value of a patient in an exchange file set. 
Since multiple patient data sets are eliminated from this specification, this 
number may have any integral value and one suggestion would be to make it 
represent the case number assigned by the cooperative group for the protocol the 
patient is enrolled in.
The Patient name is not required to be the patient's real name. However, it 
should have the same value for all image files for the same patient in the 
exchange file set. For RTOG 3D QA Center purposes, it should be the patient's 
name or some other identifier which the submitting institution can use to 
identify the data set in question should the 3D QA Center have questions about 
the case..
    Image #      :=    1 
    Image type   :=    COMMENT, CT SCAN, STRUCTURE, BEAM GEOMETRY,
                       DIGITAL FILM, DOSE, or DOSE VOLUME HISTOGRAM
    Case #       :=    1
    Patient name :=    John Q. Public




5. COMMENT 
This feature provides the capability of transmitting substantial textual 
material such as a clinical case history. The format of the data is as a 
sequence of ASCII text strings, each of no more than 80 characters, of arbitrary 
length. Although the comment text can be entered in any way desired, the most 
likely mechanism would be to provide a utility to read a file created with the 
computer's text editor and copy it into the comment "image" after adding the 
appropriate <cr/lf> line terminators and buffering. An example in 5.3 
illustrates this.
5.1 Keywords for Comments Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #             :=    actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image type          :=    COMMENT
    Case #              :=    1 for first case, 2 for second case, etc.
    Patient name        :=    patient identifier

Optional Keywords
    Writer              :=    person responsible for data
    Date written        :=    date file written (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Unit #              :=    data identifier (submitting site)
    File of origin      :=    Name of original file.
    Comment description :=    brief title to characterize comments

Format of data in the image:
ASCII text. 
5.2 Sample Entries in the Directory 
    Image #             :=    1 
    Image type          :=    COMMENT 
    Case #              :=    1
    Patient name        :=    FALSENAME
    Unit #              :=    01-23-456
    Comment description :=    Example of a comment file
5.3 Sample Image File 
This is an example of comment text. It can be used to transmit information about 
the case being transmitted, or anything else.
Many such "images" can be put on one tape, and more than one can apply to any 
one case. The directory entry "comment description" is a useful way of 
indicating what is in this file so that the recipient of the tape can decide on 
the urgency with which to approach the task of looking at the comment.



6. CT SCAN, MRI AND ULTRASOUND IMAGES
CT scans, MR images and ultrasound images (hereafter referred to as Patient 
Images or PI) are two dimensional arrays of 8 or 16 bit numbers.  In the case of 
the 16 bit numbers, they  are to be packed most significant byte first in 
accordance with the AAPM format. Patient Images (PI) are required to have square 
pixels (size of grid 1 units is the same as the grid 2 units). With the 
publication of Version 4.00, non-squarePI are now supported. The PI pixel 
numbers are required to be POSITIVE in the range 0 to 32767 for 16 bit pixels 
and 0 to 255 for 8 bit pixels - which means that some offset must be added to 
the Hounsfield (or other) numbers natural to the scanner to ensure that this 
constraint is complied with.  In the case of 8 bit data, the data type is 
unsigned byte which requires that if the 8 bit data is handled as positive and 
negative values on the submitting system, an offset must be provided to ensure 
proper order of the pixel values..
To define the CT scale fully the user is required to provide two constants, 
CT-AIR and CT-WATER which are, respectively, the values of the transmitted data 
which correspond to air and water. If, for example, the user added 1000 to CT 
numbers of a scanner which has -1000 to +3071 as the normal range of CT numbers, 
the constants would have the values CT-AIR = 0 and CT-WATER = 1024 when the CT 
values are offset by +1000. The CT offset should be large enough that no 
negative binary values are written in the CT data and no CT value is greater 
than 32767.
A new keyword (IMAGE SOURCE) has been added to provide for descriptive 
information about the source of the CT/MR/US images.   When this optional 
keyword is not used the source is assumed to be the image acquisition device 
(i.e. scanner, ultrasound unit, etc.).  When this keyword is used, the only 
allowed value for the key value is SECONDARY CAPTURE.   Using SECONDARY CAPTURE 
assumes that the images were acquired by some type of frame capture, either 
digitizer or screen capture.  Several heretofore required keywords become 
optional when the IMAGE SOURCE keyword is used.  The CT AIR and CT WATER values 
are no longer required when SECONDARY CAPTURE is the image source.  Also, the 
pixels are allowed to be rectangular when SECONDARY CAPTURE is the image source.
Many scanners have an imperfect CT scale, so that air and water do not have 
their nominal values. This can be corrected by supplying the correct values 
(rather than the nominal values) for CT-AIR and CT-WATER. Non-linear behavior is 
possible. If the user has corrected for this the keyword/value "CT scale := 
Linearized" must be provided. If the CT numbers have been transformed to 
water-equivalent densities the keywords/value "CT Scale := Water-equivalent" 
must be provided. If the CT numbers transmitted should be distrusted above the 
certain value, that value should be specified with the "Distrust above" keyword.
6.1 Coordinate System and Scan Offsets 
The pixel data are to be ordered so that, if a scan is considered to be viewed 
from the patient's feet, the first pixel would correspond to the upper left hand 
corner of the scan, subsequent pixels would correspond to the data in the first 
row going from left to right followed by the pixels of the second and subsequent 
rows, ending at the lower right hand corner.
A right-handed cartesian coordinate system - referred to as the PATIENT 
COORDINATE SYSTEM - is superimposed on the scans. ADD2: The z axis is positive 
pointing out of the paper, which always points toward the patient's feet. It 
should be noted that this is DIFFERENT from the IEC patient coordinate system.
 
Figure 6.1 
Figure 6.1 illustrates the coordinate system. The axes depicted in Figure 6.1 
represent a patient who is scanned head first in a supine position.  The 
coordinate system is more accurately described as a "hybrid" coordinate system 
where X and Y are independent upon the patient orientation on an external beam 
treatment unit couch and the Z coordinate is based on patient scan order.  While 
the Figure 6.1 anatomical labels correspond to the identified axes when scanned 
head first, supine, the X and Y coordinate axes are actually tied to a treatment 
couch with +X to the right of the gantry when viewed from the couch and +Y is up 
toward the ceiling (assumes couch position orthogonal to plane of gantry 
rotation).  The +Z coordinate is always toward the patient's feet independent of 
their scanning or treatment orientation which may require inverting this 
coordinate value depending upon the order maintained by the RTP system.  With 
regard to coordinate system for brachytherapy data exchange, the anatomical 
labels and the corresponding axes identified in Figure 6.1 must be used.
Generally the origin of the patient coordinate system is at the dead center of 
the CT/MRI/US image (element 160.5, 160.5 of a 320x320 array, for instance where 
1 refers to the first pixel in the image). However, offsets of the images are 
permitted as indicated in the following figure. Offsets are positive when the 
displacement is in the indicated directions as in Figure 6.2 (i.e. they are the 
directional measurement from the patient coordinate system origin in X and Y to 
the geometric center of the scan). 
 
Figure 6.2 
Scans must be provided in contiguous order on tape (or in the file set), in 
order of monotonically increasing value of the z coordinate. However, a sequence 
of scans need not be uniformly spaced along the axis normal to the plane of the 
scans (z axis).
In terms of this coordinate system, CT/MRI/US data are to be stored within the 
data array in the following manner: The upper left hand corner pixel (least x, 
greatest y) is first, followed by pixels in the first row (i.e. the x dimension 
is incremented first), followed by subsequent rows of lesser y value until the 
bottom right (greatest x, least y) pixel terminates the array.  With the 
exception of some keyword changes, the MRI/US image format is almost identical 
to that of the CT scan images both in terms of the actual pixel data as well as 
in the directory structure entries.
6.2 Keywords for Images Used in CT Scan Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                :=    actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image type             :=    CT SCAN    identifies as CT scan
    Case #                 :=    1 for first case, 2 for second case, etc.
    Patient name           :=    patient identifier
    Scan type              :=    TRANSVERSE
    CT offset              :=    see text
    Grid 1 units           :=    pixel width (cm)
    Grid 2 units           :=    pixel height (cm) Must be same as Grid 1
                                 units unless IMAGE SOURCE is used
    Number representation  :=    TWO'S COMPLEMENT INTEGER
    Bytes per pixel        :=    must equal 2    
    Number of dimensions   :=    must equal 2    
    Size of dimension 1    :=    number of rows
    Size of dimension 2    :=    number of columns
    z value                :=    couch position (cm, + to feet)
    x offset               :=    usually 0.0 (cm) [signed x distance from
                                 coordinate system's x origin to the
                                 geometric center of the CT scan pixel image]
    y offset               :=    usually 0.0 (cm) [signed y distance from
                                 coordinate system's y origin to the
                                 geometric center of the CT scan pixel image]
    CT-air                 :=    0 (this value is optional when the 
                                 IMAGE SOURCE is used)
    CT-water               :=    1000 (this value is optional when the 
                                 IMAGE SOURCE is used)

Optional Keywords
    Unit #                 :=    Unit number or ID
    Site of Interest       :=    prostate, etc. as appropriate
    Scan description       :=    "contrast study", etc.
    Scanner type           :=    GE9800, SIEMENS DRH, etc.
    Head in/out            :=    IN, OUT
    Position in scan       :=    NOSE UP, NOSE DOWN, LEFT SIDE DOWN,
                                 RIGHT SIDE DOWN
    Patient attitude       :=    RECUMBENT, SEATED, STANDING
    Tape of origin         :=    helps you retrieve your original data
    Study number of origin :=    helps you retrieve your original data
    Scan ID                :=    original scan identifier
    Scan #                 :=    scan # in this sequence
    Scan date              :=    use AAPM format (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Scan file name         :=    original file name
    Slice thickness        :=    in cm.
    CT scale               :=    LINEARIZED, WATER-EQUIVALENT
    Distrust above         :=    maximum credible CT value
    Image Source           :=    SECONDARY CAPTURE

The pixel sizes (Grid 1 or 2 units) are positive for transverse oriented images. 
  All coordinates and linear dimensions are expressed in centimeters.
Format of data in the image file:
Binary data in two's complement integer 0 to 32767. 
6.3 Sample Entries in the Directory 
Only the first two scans of this data set are shown.
    Image #                 :=    1
    Image Type              :=    CT SCAN
    CASE #                  :=    1
    Patient name            :=    BREAST1B
    Scan type               :=    TRANSVERSE
    CT Offset               :=    1024
    Grid 1 Units            :=    0.0938
    Grid 2 Units            :=    0.0938
    Number Representation   :=    TWO'S COMPLEMENT INTEGER
    Bytes per Pixel         :=    2
    Number of Dimensions    :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1     :=    512
    Size of Dimension 2     :=    512
    Z value                 :=    7.5000
    X Offset                :=    0.0000
    Y Offset                :=    0.0000
    CT-air                  :=    0
    CT-WATER                :=    1024
    SCAN #                  :=    1
    Slice Thickness         :=    0.5000

    Image #                 :=    2
    Image Type              :=    CT SCAN
    CASE #                  :=    1
    Patient name            :=    BREAST1B
    Scan type               :=    TRANSVERSE
    CT Offset               :=    1024
    Grid 1 Units            :=    0.0938
    Grid 2 Units            :=    0.0938
    Number Representation   :=    TWO'S COMPLEMENT INTEGER
    Bytes per Pixel         :=    2
    Number of Dimensions    :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1     :=    512
    Size of Dimension 2     :=    512
    Z value                 :=    8.0000
    X Offset                :=    0.0000
    Y Offset                :=    0.0000
    CT-air                  :=    0
    CT-WATER                :=    1024
    SCAN #                  :=    2
    Slice Thickness         :=    0.5000

and so on for the remainder of the scans.
6.4 Sample Image of Data for CT Scan 
Data are in 16-bit, 2's complement, integer representation but are required to 
be within the 0 to 32767 range. Data is in raster order with the first pixel 
being the upper left of the image (i.e. the most negative x coordinate pixel and 
the most positive y coordinate pixel), the next pixel being just to the right of 
the first pixel until that raster line is complete, then all remaining raster 
lines until the last pixel (lower right).
6.5 Keywords for Images Used in MRI/US Scan Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                :=    actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image type             :=    MRI or ULTRASOUND
    Case #                 :=    1 or Registered case number (numeric only)
    Patient name           :=    patient identifier
    Scan type              :=    TRANSVERSE
    Pixel offset           :=    value added to each pixel to ensure >= 0 for all pixels
    Grid 1 units           :=    pixel width (cm)
    Grid 2 units           :=    pixel height (cm) Must be same as Grid 1
                                 units unless IMAGE SOURCE is used
    Number representation  :=    TWO'S COMPLEMENT INTEGER or UNSIGNED BYTE
    Bytes per pixel        :=    2 for two's complement or 1 for unsigned byte    
    Number of dimensions   :=    must equal 2    
    Size of dimension 1    :=    number of rows
    Size of dimension 2    :=    number of columns
    z value                :=    couch position (cm, + to feet)
    x offset               :=    usually 0.0 (cm) [signed x distance from
                                 coordinate system's x origin to the
                                 geometric center of the CT scan pixel image]
    y offset               :=    usually 0.0 (cm) [signed y distance from
                                 coordinate system's y origin to the
                                 geometric center of the CT scan pixel image]
Optional Keywords
    Scan date              :=    use AAPM format (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Image Source           :=    SECONDARY CAPTURE

The pixel sizes (Grid 1 or 2 units) are positive for transverse oriented images. 
  All coordinates and linear dimensions are expressed in centimeters.
Format of data in the image file:
Binary data in two's complement integer 0 to 32767 or byte 0 to 255. 
6.6 Sample Entries in the MRI/US Directory 
Only the first two scans of this data set are shown.
    Image #                 :=    1
    Image Type              :=    MRI
    CASE #                  :=    1
    Patient name            :=    BREAST1B
    Scan type               :=    TRANSVERSE
    Pixel Offset            :=    127
    Grid 1 Units            :=    0.0938
    Grid 2 Units            :=    0.0938
    Number Representation   :=    UNSIGNED BYTE
    Bytes per Pixel         :=    1
    Number of Dimensions    :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1     :=    256
    Size of Dimension 2     :=    256
    Z value                 :=    5.5000
    X Offset                :=    0.0000
    Y Offset                :=    0.0000
    Scan Date               :=    22, 06, 1999

    Image #                 :=    2
    Image Type              :=    ULTRASOUND
    CASE #                  :=    1
    Patient name            :=    BREAST1B
    Scan type               :=    TRANSVERSE
    Pixel Offset            :=    0
    Grid 1 Units            :=    0.0938
    Grid 2 Units            :=    0.0938
    Number Representation   :=    UNSIGNED BYTE
    Bytes per Pixel         :=    1
    Number of Dimensions    :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1     :=    256
    Size of Dimension 2     :=    256
    Z value                 :=    -3.0000
    X Offset                :=    0.0000
    Y Offset                :=    0.0000

and so on for the remainder of the scans.
6.7 Sample Image of Data for MRI/US Scan 
Data are either in 16-bit, 2's complement, integer representation but are 
required to be within the 0 to 32767 range or in 8-bit unsigned byte within 0 to 
255. Data is in raster order with the first pixel being the upper left of the 
image (i.e. the most negative x coordinate pixel and the most positive y 
coordinate pixel), the next pixel being just to the right of the first pixel 
until that raster line is complete, then all remaining raster lines until the 
last pixel (lower right).
 



7. STRUCTURES 
Structures are connected sequences of three-dimensional coordinates which define 
volumes of interest such as the target volume. A "structure" has a variety of 
attributes, including a "name", "edition number", "color", free text 
"description", etc.
The organization of the points is that they are grouped together in planes which 
coincide with planes on which CT scans are centered. A given structure does not 
have to be defined in all planes in which scans exist, but the planes in which 
it is defined are contiguous. That is, no planes are "skipped".
Within a given plane, a structure will consist of one or more "segments" 
(usually just one). Each segment is a sequence of at least four (4) points which 
are connected and the last and first points must be the same (that is, the 
segment is "closed"). These points define a generally irregular curve which lies 
on the surface of the volume being defined. All segments need not have the same 
number of points. Segments in contiguous scans are assumed to be connected in 
some way so as to form the surface of the volume. The reason for permitting more 
than one segment per plane is so that Y-shaped or O-shaped structures may be 
defined.
The current definition of structures is tied closely to a scan sequence, 
paralleling what is currently done in most programs. More general definitions, 
requiring a more general data structure, may be needed in future. The 
keyword/value sequence "Structure format:=Scan-based" shall be included to 
permit subsequent expansion.
The following figure suggests how the components of a structure are arranged. 
The coordinates are in centimeters and are relative to the PATIENT COORDINATE 
SYSTEM defined above (Figure 7.1).
 
Figure 7.1 
The data storage in a structure's image is "defined" through the example in 
Section 7.3. The data are placed in the buffer in the following order:
    Number of levels (total # of scans)
      Scan number (=1 for first scan, etc.)
        Number of segments in this level (scan)
          number of points in first segment
          triplets of (x, y, z) coordinates, one per point, last=first
          number of points in second segment
          triplets of (x, y ,z) coordinates, one per point, last=first
Scan number (=2 for second scan,) Number of segments in this level (scan) number 
of points in first segment triplets of (x, y, z) coordinates, one per point, 
last=first number of points in second segment triplets of (x, y ,z) coordinates, 
one per point, last=first 
Comments may be embedded in the data file if enclosed in quotes as documented in 
3.2.1.
Scans must be contiguous on tape. This supports the data structure of structures 
which presumes that sequential contours are associated with sequential 
(contiguous) scans ordered monotonically with increasing value of the associated 
z coordinate. All scans must be referenced (in order) even if the structure does 
not exist in a particular slice. In this case the only data in the file will be 
the Scan # and the Number of Segments (0). See Section 7.3 for an example of 
this.
7.1 Keywords for Images Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                     :=    actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image type                  :=    STRUCTURE
    Case #                      :=    1 for first patient,
                                      2 for second patient, etc.
    Patient name                :=    patient identifier
    Structure name              :=    structure identifier (liver, heart,
                                      etc.)
    Number Representation       :=    CHARACTER
    Structure format            :=    SCAN-BASED
    Number of scans             :=    same as # CT scans in the exchange
                                      file set

Optional Keywords
    Maximum # scans             :=    100 or system limit (may be set to
                                      Number of scans value)
    Maximum points per segment  :=    200 or system limit
    Maximum segments per scan   :=    2 or system limit
    Unit #                      :=    unit number or ID
    Writer                      :=    person responsible for this data
    Date written                :=    AAPM format date (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Structure edition           :=    1 or higher
    Structure color             :=    RED, GREEN, BLUE, YELLOW, MAGENTA,
                                      CYAN OR WHITE
    Structure description       :=    Free form text
    Study # of origin           :=    for submitting institution's
                                      identification
    Orientation of structure    :=    TRANSVERSE
Format of data in the image:
ASCII Text 
7.2 Sample Entries in the Directory 
    Image #                    :=    56
    Image Type                 :=    STRUCTURE
    Case #                     :=    1
    Patient Name               :=    BREAST1B
    Structure Name             :=    EXTERNAL
    Number Representation      :=    CHARACTER
    Structure Format           :=    SCAN-BASED
    Number of Scans            :=    55
    Maximum # scans            :=    128
    Maximum Points per Segment :=    200
    Maximum Segments per Scan  :=    4

    Image #                    :=    57
    Image Type                 :=    STRUCTURE
    Case #                     :=    1
    Patient Name               :=    BREAST1B
    Structure Name             :=    TARGET
    Number Representation      :=    CHARACTER
    Structure Format           :=    SCAN-BASED
    Number of Scans            :=    55
    Maximum # scans            :=    128
    Maximum Points per Segment :=    200
    Maximum Segments per Scan  :=    4

7.3 Sample Image Data for Structure 

    "NUMBER OF LEVELS"   55
    "SCAN # "   1
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "   2
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "   3
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "   4
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    (8 structure scan numbers omitted here)
    "SCAN # "  13
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "  14
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "  15
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "  16
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "  17
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   0
    "SCAN # "  18
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   1
    "# OF POINTS   "  15
      -6.440,   5.850,  -3.500
      -6.230,   5.890,  -3.500
     (11 coordinate triplets omitted here)
      -6.660,   5.620,  -3.500
      -6.440,   5.850,  -3.500
    "SCAN # "  19
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   1
    "# OF POINTS   "  32
      -6.260,   7.190,  -3.000
      -6.350,   7.240,  -3.000
      -6.350,   7.240,  -3.000
    (28 coordinate triplets omitted here)
       -6.260,   7.190,  -3.000
    "SCAN # "  20
    "# OF SEGMENTS "   1
    "# OF POINTS   "  27
      -7.590,   7.580,  -2.500
      -7.300,   7.690,  -2.500

etc.



8. BEAM GEOMETRY 
Beam geometry's are to be be transferred as one data file per beam with the data 
file containing the information defining the beam aperture information. Some of 
the formalism herein is borrowed from the Foundation Library Specification and 
Virtual Machine Platform (VMP) Specification document from the Radiotherapy 
Treatment Planning Tools Collaborative Working Group (Tech. Report 91-1, Ira 
Kalet, Ph.D., Radiation Oncology Department RC-08, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98125, USA).
There are several pieces of information required to be able to build a 
"treatment plan" using beam geometries. The first is the particular beam 
definition itself, including the prescribed dose per treatment of this field as 
well as the number of treatments delivered. Second is the identification of 
other beams that are treated in the same fraction(s) with this beam so that 
fractionation information may be obtained. Additionally, the grouping of all 
beams which are treated (or may be treated) is also provided so that a composite 
of all treatments may be reconstructed and the fractionation data with it.
The origin of the beam coordinate system (for the aperture definition) is 
defined with the treatment machine's collimator rotated to the neutral position 
(e.g. new Varian machines allow collimator angles from 90 to 270 degrees with 
180 being the "neutral" position) and the gantry angle set such that the beam is 
pointed at the floor (down). The +y axis is toward the machine gantry when 
viewing along the beam's central axis with the gantry toward the top of your 
head. The +x axis is to your right when using the same view. All coordinates for 
apertures are in this unrotated coordinate system. All collimator, gantry and 
couch angles are defined to be zero for the gantry pointed down, the couch 
longitudinal axis orthogonal to the plane of gantry rotation and the 
collimator's +y axis is along the couch's longitudinal axis and is pointed 
toward the gantry. See Figure 8.1.
Angles are positive in the counter-clockwise (CCW) direction. CCW is defined 
from the above view for collimator and couch rotation and as viewed when looking 
into the gantry from the couch for the gantry rotation. The assumed patient 
orientation is with head to gantry. If the patient is being treated with foot to 
gantry, the keyword HEAD I/OUT must be used with a key value of OUT. The HEAD 
IN/OUT keyword may also be standardly used for head in as well but is required 
for head out treatments. For example, a right lateral beam for a patient 
oriented with head to gantry will have a gantry angle of 90 degrees, while the 
gantry angle would be 270 degrees for a right lateral beam with the patient's 
feet toward the gantry.
Beam shapes may be specified by MLC settings, contours for custom portal blocks 
and, for use with Peregrine and similar systems, by transmission maps.   For a 
simple block, or MLC field, the map points inside the open regions of the beam 
would have a transmission value of 1.000.  The map points under the MLC leafs or 
block will have transmission values appropriate with recommendations and/or 
requirements of receiving system.  The 3D QA Center does not support the use of 
transmission maps for block specification.
Note that dynamic, conformal therapy and intensity modulation are not explicitly 
accounted for here and are left for future expansion.
 
Figure 8.1 
8.1 Data Contained in the Image File 
The data in the image file is as follows: 
  Coordinate of machine isocenter (or nominal source reference point distance 
  for machines without a rotational center) in centimeters in the patient 
  coordinate system. 
  Collimator setting(s) for the x jaws (e.g. 25.0 for SYMMETRIC, or 11.0, 14.0 
  for ASYMMETRIC -- negative values are for a jaw that crosses and blocks the 
  central axis)

  Collimator setting(s) for the y jaws (e.g. 25.0 for SYMMETRIC, or 11.0, 14.0 
  for ASYMMETRIC -- negative values are for a jaw that crosses and blocks the 
  central axis) 
ADD3: For asymmetric collimator specifications the jaw which normally resides to 
the left (negative X in beam coordinates) or to the bottom (negative Y in beam 
coordinates) is specified first followed by the opposing jaw position. Again, 
note that a negative coordinate for an asymmetric jaw value implies that it has 
crossed the central ray. For instance, an asymmetric collimators setting of 
11.0, 14.0 for X and -2.0, 8.0 for Y results in a 25.0 cm wide by 6.0 cm long 
rectangle which is centered at +1.5 cm in X and +5.0 cm in Y.
For APERTURE TYPE := COLLIMATOR 
  No additional data is included (yes this does seem a bit wasteful of space but 
  should be an anomaly for conformal therapy). However, an empty file of minimal 
  length must be provided to maintain consistency and order in the format. In 
  the case of conformal therapy (for which this format was extended) this empty 
  file is improbable. 
For APERTURE TYPE := BLOCK 
  # of block contours (the following are repeated for each contour) 
  Block type (0 = aperture definition, 1=block definition) for block. Only one 
  aperture is allowed per beam while multple blocks are allowed. 
  Block fractional transmission under block (must be less than 1.00) 
  # of block coordinate pairs (must close the contour) for block 
  Coordinate pairs for block contour 
For APERTURE TYPE := MLC_X or MLC_Y 
  # of leaf pairs 
  Center coordinate for each leaf pair in increasing coordinate (y values for 
  MLC_X, x values for MLC_Y) 
  Thickness of each leaf pair in cm. 
  Extension coordinates for each leaf pair where a negative value denotes 
  extension across the central axis (minimum x or y, maximum x or y leaf 
  position). 
  NOTE that most currently available commercial MLC collimators are MLC_X only.  
  Generally MLC_Y or MLC_XY is not appropriate for use 
For APERTURE TYPE := MLC_XY 
  # of leaf pairs in x 
  Center coordinate for each leaf pair in increasing coordinate (y values) 
  Thickness of each x leaf pair in cm. 
  Extension coordinates for each x leaf pair where a negative value (x) denotes 
  extension across the central axis. 
  # of leaf pairs in y 
  Center coordinate for each leaf pair in increasing coordinate (x values) 
  Thickness of each x leaf pair in cm. 
  Extension coordinates for each y leaf pair where a negative value (y) denotes 
  extension across the central axis (minimum x or y, maximum x or y leaf 
  position). 
For APERTURE TYPE := TRANSMISSION_MAP 
  # of X transmission values (I), # of Y transmission values (J) 
  size of square transmission element (cm)  (transmission maps are required to 
  use square map elements, but matrix may be rectangular) 
  X1, Y1 (starting coordinate in cm of the center of the upper-left map element, 
  -X, +Y in beam coordinates) 
  # of transmission value, block thickness pairs (N) 
  transmission value #1, block thickness #1 (cm) 
  transmission value #2, block thickness #2 (cm) 
  ...... 
  ...... 
  ...... 
  transmission value #N, block thickness #N (cm) 
  ROW #1 transmission values 
  ROW #2 transmission values 
  ...... 
  ...... 
  ...... 
  ROW #J transmission values 
If blocks are used, only one aperture definition is allowed although there is no 
strict limit on block definitions. This is to prevent system dependent ambiguity 
which would arise in the case of multiple apertures. The assumption this 
specification makes is that once a ray from a beam is blocked, it stays blocked. 
In the case of an aperture, all points outside of the contour are implicitly 
blocked, therefore they remain blocked.
Transmission Map Description
The transmission map specification involves three primary bits of data.  The 
first is the matrix specification for the map for a rectangular matrix of square 
transmission elements.  This specification includes the size of the square 
elements, the number of elements in each row and column and the coordinate of 
the center of the elements (not a corner). Another is a transmission value for 
the rectangular matrix made up of square elements where the transmission numbers 
represent the appropriate transmission value for the block material used 
according to the requirements of the receiving system.  Points not under any 
block material will have a transmission value of 1.00 with lesser values for 
points under attenuators (MLC or block). Lastly, a map of block material 
thickness versus transmission value to define the physical characteristics of 
the portal shaping device.  This implies that there are only as many distinct 
transmission values as are defined in the list of thicknesses and transmission 
values.
 
The order of the data in the file (for the transmission map) is identical to 
that used for compensating filters.  The transmission values are specified in 
raster order from the most negative X and most positive Y coordinate (in beam 
coordinates) to the most positive X coordinate and most positive Y coordinate 
for the first row, followed by each subsequent row (see Figure 8.2).
 

Figure 8.2
An example of the data in a transmission map beam data file is as follows.  Note 
that the isocenter and collimator information is first in the file, followed by 
the transmission map followed by any compensator information.
    "# of X Elements" 101, "# of Y elements" 85
    "Size of square matrix element (cm)" 0.15
    "Center of X1, Y1 (cm)" -7.5, 6.3
    "# of transmission value thickness pairs" 2
    "Pair #1" 1.0000, 0.0
    "Pair #2" 0.0325, 8.1
    "NX" 8, "NY" 6
    "ROW #1"0.0325, 0.0325, 0.0325, 0.0325, 0.0325, 0.0325, 0.0325, (etc)
    "ROW #2"0.0325, 0.0325, 0.0325, 1.0000, 1.0000, 1.0000, 1.0000, (etc)
    Compensating filter information follows.
    
ADD4:Compensating Filters
Compensating filters may be specified in an abbreviated or extended form. The 
abbreviated form is identical to that used for Version 3.22 of this 
Specification. That uses only a "flag" to indicate that a compensating filter 
was used through use of the COMPENSATOR keyword and the appropriate keyvalue 
(NONE, 1D-X, 1D-Y, 2D, or 3D).
The extended form allows for either construction or attenuation information to 
be provided using the new keyword COMPENSATOR FORMAT. The key values available 
for use with this keyword are: THICKNESS, ATTENUATION, TISSUE, or NONE. Using 
the NONE keyvalue is identical to the results obtrained through using only the 
COMPENSATOR keyword with the appropriate flag and not including the COMPENSATOR 
FORMAT keyword (identical to the Version 3.22 capability). The other key values 
(THICKNESS, ATTENUATION and TISSUE) indicate that a matrix of compensating 
filter construction is being supplied in the beam data file. This matrix 
specification and data is in the data file following all other beam geometry 
information (isocenter, collimators, blocks and/or MLC specifications). In the 
case of ATTENUATION, the matrix values are fractional transmission (i.e. 0.25 
indicates that 25% of the impinging radiation is transmitted). There is no 
explicit or implict statement about whether the attenuation values are narrow or 
broad beam. The matrix values in the data file for THICKNESS indicate the 
thickness of the construction material in cm. It is assumed that the receiving 
system has predefined information necessary to appropriately use this 
information for dose calculation (e.g. construction material). For TISSUE 
specified compensators, the matrix values correspond to the thickness of unit 
density tissue which must be accounted for. This generic specification may allow 
for appropriate interpretation by construction systems or devices.
2D or 3D Compensator Construction Specification
As the only difference between 2D and 3D compensators is the inclusion, or 
exclusion, of heterogeneity corrections for their design, they are specified in 
identical fashion as a two-dimensional grid defined at the NOMINAL ISOCENTER 
DISTANCE specified for the beam in which the delta-x between all columns in the 
matrix is uniform as is the delta-y between rows, but where the delta-x and 
delta-y are not required to be equal to each other (but, probably will be). The 
compensator matrix data is specified in raster order such that the starting 
coordinate specified is to the upper left (least X and greatest Y matrix 
element) of the grid (similar to the order of dose matrix values in a transverse 
plane). Because it is assumed that each matrix element occupies space, the 
starting coordinate specified (and the coordinates for other elements computed) 
are in the center of a region of attenuation with width delta-X and length 
delta-Y. Specifying the center of the matrix element causes the X1, Y1 
coordinates to be offset by one-half the delta of the axis from the corner of 
the physical compensator (toward positive X and negative Y). The data is 
formatted as follows: 
  NX, NY (integer number of columns and rows) 
  delta-X, delta-Y (floating point interval between columns [greater than 0.0], 
  floating point interval between rows [less than 0.0]) 
  X1, Y1 (starting coordinate in cm of the center of the upper-left matrix 
  element, -X, +Y in beam coordinates) 
  beam attenuation coefficient (1/cm) for THICKNESS specifications, or 1.00 for 
  ATTENUATION and TISSUE specifications 
  ROW #1 attenuation or thickness values 
  ROW #2 attenuation or thickness values 
  ... 
  ... 
  ROW #NY attenuation or thickness values 

Figure 8.3
Figure 8.3 demonstrates the order of compensating filter data in the data file 
using the numbers in the individual compensator cells. Note that this is in 
raster order with a positive delta-X and a negative delta-Y. This figure shows 
the central ray of the beam through the center of a grid element, however, this 
is not required and the grid may align in any fashion with the major axes of the 
beam.
A simple (non-realistic) example of a 2D or 3D compensator construction text 
file follows. This sample is for a VERY SIMPLE compensator for a SMALL field for 
a beam with a NOMINAL ISOCENTER DISTANCE of 100.0 cm and for which the 
compensator matrix elements project to 1.5 cm wide at this distance. The 
collimator settings are symmetric along both axes and result in a field size of 
10.0 cm x 7.0 cm at this same distance. The COMPENSATOR FORMAT is ATTENUATION. 
For compensating filter specification in thicknesses, it is assumed that the 
receiving system has some predefined understanding of the material used for 
construction.  This compensator information follows the isocenter, collimator 
and blocking specification information.
"NX" 8, "NY" 6
"delta-X (cm)" 1.50, "delta-Y (cm)" 1.50
"X1, Y1" -7.25, 3.75
"Attenuation value per cm" 1.00
"ROW #1"0.872, 0.880, 0.820, 0.820, 0.850, 0.850, 0.900, 0.900
"ROW #2"0.900, 0.900, 0.820, 0.850, 0.850, 0.850, 0.900, 0.900
"ROW #3"0.900, 0.900, 0.850, 0.850, 0.850, 0.950, 0.950, 0.872
"ROW #4"0.900, 0.900, 0.850, 0.800, 0.900, 1.000, 0.950, 0.872
"ROW #5"0.872, 0.900, 0.850, 0.800, 0.850, 0.950, 0.900, 0.900
"ROW #6"0.872, 0.880, 0.820, 0.820, 0.850, 0.850, 0.900, 0.900

The 1D compensator (or custom step-wedge) is more simply specified as it 
contains only a single array corresponding to the axis across the steps (X or 
Y). Because the steps of these types of systems are not necessarily regularly 
spaced, the compensator is specified much like a cumulative histogram plot with 
each step being specified by a starting beam coordinate (at the NOMINAL 
ISOCENTER DISTANCE) and a thickness or attenuation value which is considered 
constant to the coordinate of the next step specified. Note that the type 
(ATTENUATION, TISSUE or THICKNESS) are handled in the same manner as that for 2D 
and 3D compensators. The slabs must be specified order of increasing coordinate 
(X or Y, as appropriate). 
  N (integer number of compensator steps) 
  beam attenuation coefficient (1/cm) for THICKNESS specifications, or 1.00 for 
  ATTENUATION and TISSUE specifications 
  SLAB #1 starting coordinate, attenuation or thickness values 
  SLAB #2 starting coordinate, attenuation or thickness values 
  ... 
  ... 
  SLAB #N starting coordinate, 0 
A simple example of a 1D compensator data file entry for a 1D-X compensator 
specified by THICKNESS follows:
"NX" 8
"Attenuation value per cm" 0.967
"SLAB #1 X-coordinate"-10.00, 0.000
"SLAB #2 X-coordinate" -9.00, 0.600
"SLAB #3 X-coordinate" -7.00, 1.200
"SLAB #4 X-coordinate" -3.00, 1.800
"SLAB #5 X-coordinate"  0.00, 2.400
"SLAB #6 X-coordinate"  1.00, 3.000
"SLAB #7 X-coordinate"  3.00, 3.600
"SLAB #8 X-coordinate"  6.00, 4.200
"SLAB #9 X-coordinate"  8.00, 4.800
"SLAB #10 X-coordinate" 10.00, 4.200
"SLAB #11 X-coordinate" 11.00, 0.000

There is no extrapolation or extension of compensator information beyond the 
coordinate values covered by the explicit compensator specification. Specifying 
a compensator smaller that the open field dimensions on the skin will have 
indeterminate results.
Following are the keywords for the Beam Geometry definition in the directory 
file:
8.2 Keywords for Images Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                :=   actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image Type             :=   BEAM GEOMETRY
    Case #                 :=   1 for first case, 2 for second case
                                in file set, etc.
    Patient Name           :=   patient identifier
    Beam #                 :=   Beam number in plan of origin (to
                                index with dose files later)
    Beam Modality          :=   X-RAY, ELECTRON, PROTON, NEUTRON, OTHER
    Beam Energy(MeV)       :=   Beam energy in MeV
    Beam Description       :=   Text Description of beam (i.e. LPO,
                                AP Boost, etc.)
    Rx Dose Per Tx (Gy)    :=   ICRU Reference point dose per treatment
                                (generally, isocenter dose)
    Number of Tx           :=   Number of treatments using this field
    Fraction Group ID      :=   ID to group beams of common fraction
    Beam Type              :=   STATIC, ARC
    Collimator Type        :=   SYMMETRIC, ASYMMETRIC, ASYMMETRIC_X,
                                ASYMMETRIC_Y
    Aperture Type          :=   BLOCK, MLC_X, MLC_Y, MLC_XY, COLLIMATOR, or
                                TRANSMISSION MAP
    Collimator Angle       :=   Collimator angle in degrees
    Gantry Angle           :=   Gantry angle in degrees (also start
                                angle for an arc beam)
    Couch Angle            :=   Couch angle in degrees
    Nominal Isocenter Dist :=   Rotational source-isocenter distance
                                in cm or nominal treatment distance
                                (i.e. 80.0 cm for Co-60)
    Number Representation  :=   CHARACTER

Optional Keywords
    Plan ID of Origin      :=   Plan ID of beam origin for grouping
                                beams and doses
    Aperture Description   :=   Description of beam aperture
    Aperture ID            :=   Identifier of Aperture for beam
    Wedge Angle            :=   Wedge angle in degrees (required if
                                wedges are used for this beam)
    Wedge Rotation Angle   :=   0, 90, 180, 270 ( required if wedges
                                are used for this beam) where:
                                  0 - toe of wedge points toward +y beam axis
                                 90 - toe of wedge points toward +x beam axis
                                180 - toe of wedge points toward -y beam axis
                                270 - toe of wedge points toward -x beam axis
    Arc Angle              :=   Arc angle in degrees (Req'd of ARC
                                Beam Type) it's sign should reflect the
                                stopping gantry angle.
    Machine ID             :=   text string uniquely identifying machine
                                parameter set used for dose calculation
    Beam Weight            :=   numeric value specifying beam weight used
                                (or to be used) for dose calculation with
                                definition of this value driven by the
                                WEIGHT UNITS keyword
    Weight Units           :=   MU, RELATIVE or PERCENT
                                MU is actual monitor unit (or time) setting
                                  used for each treatment
                                RELATIVE is the fractional amount of total
                                  beam on time for this beam versus the total
                                  beam on time
                                PERCENT is the percentage amount of total
                                  beam on time for this beam versus the total
                                  beam on time
                           BEAM WEIGHT and BEAM UNITS are both required
                           if either one of them is used
    Compensator            :=   NONE, 1D-X, 1D-Y, 2D, 3D where:
                                1D is a customized step wedge along
                                   specified beam axis
                                2D is a topographic correcting compensator
                                   (an Ellis type for instance)
                                3D corrects for topography and heterogeneity
    Compensator Format     :=   THICKNESS, TRANSMISSION, TISSUE or NONE where:
                                THICKNESS indicates the compensator is
                                  specified in ray thicknesses in cm
                                TRANSMISSION indicates the compensator is
                                  specified in ray transmission values
                                TISSUE indicates the compensator is
                                  specified in ray thicknesses in cm of tissue
                                NONE indicates the compensator's
                                  construction is not specified (default if this
                                  keyword not used for a compensator)
    Head In/Out            :=   IN, OUT where:
                                IN specifies this beam treated with
                                  the patient's head toward the gantry
                                  (prior to any couch rotation), and
                                OUT specifies this beam treated with
                                  the patient's head away from the gantry
                                  (prior to any couch rotation).
                                NOTE: Orientation is assumed to be
                                head in unless otherwise specified.
                                This keyword is required for a foot
                                in treatment.

                
Format of data in the image file:
ASCII TEXT 
8.3 Sample Entries in the Directory 
    Image #                :=    25
    Image Type             :=    BEAM GEOMETRY
    Case #                 :=    1
    Patient Name           :=    Joe Smith
    Beam #                 :=    1
    Beam Modality          :=    X-RAY
    Beam Energy(MeV)       :=    18
    Beam Description       :=    AP Port
    Rx Dose Per Tx (Gy)    :=    1.00
    Number of Tx           :=    25
    Beam Type              :=    STATIC
    Plan ID of Origin      :=    final
    Collimator Type        :=    ASYMMETRIC_X
    Aperture Type          :=    BLOCK
    Aperture Description   :=    AP Portal Large Field
    Collimator Angle       :=    0
    Gantry Angle           :=    0
    Couch Angle            :=    0
    Nominal Isocenter Dist :=    100.0
    Aperture ID            :=    AP Port Block
    Compensator            :=    1D-Y
    Number Representation  :=    CHARACTER
    Fraction Group ID:     :=    1
    Head In/Out:           :=    IN

8.4 Sample Image of Beam Geometry Data 
    "Isocenter coordinate" 1.0, -2.5, 15.2
    "Collimator Setting x" 11.0, -2.5
    "Collimator Setting y" 15.0
    "# of block contours" 2
    "Block #1 type contour encloses open portal" 0
    "Transmission under block" 0.03125
    "# of block coordinate pairs" 6
    -10.5,   7.0,   -3.0,   7.0,  -3.0,  -7.2,  -5.0,  -4.3,  -9.5,  -6.5
    -10.5,   7.0
    "Block #2 type contour encloses spinal shield" 1
    "Transmission under block" 0.03125
    "# of block coordinate pairs" 5
    -7.5,   7.5,   -5.5,   7.5,  -5.5,  -7.5,  -7.5,  -7.5,  -7.5,   7.5
    "Compensating filter data as shown above"

Here is a short example of a multi-leaf data file (MLC_X) with asymmetric 
collimators in x (ASYMMETRIC_X). All coordinates are defined at the Nominal 
Isocenter Distance. Note that words in quotes are to be ignored by the 
processing program as documented in Section 3.1.2.
    "Isocenter coordinate" 1.0, -2.5, 15.2
    "Collimator Setting x" 11.0, -2.5
    "Collimator Setting y" 15.0
    "Number of Leaf Pairs" 26
    "Leaf center y positions"    -12.5, -11.5, -10.5,  -9.5,  -8.5,  -7.5
     -6.5,  -5.5,  -4.5,  -3.5,  -2.5,  -1.5,  -0.5,   0.5,   1.5,   2.5
      3.5,   4.5,   5.5,   6.5,   7.5,   8.5,   9.5,  10.5,  11.5,  12.5
    "Leaf pair thickness"  1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0
      1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0
      1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0,   1.0
    "Leaf extensions for Y1"   -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y2"   -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y3"   -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y4"   -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y5"   -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y6"    6.86,  6.95
    "Leaf extensions for Y7"    7.93,  7.96
    "Leaf extensions for Y8"    8.31,  8.26
    "Leaf extensions for Y9"    8.31,  8.25
    "Leaf extensions for Y10"   8.30,  8.25
    "Leaf extensions for Y11"   8.30,  8.25
    "Leaf extensions for Y12"   8.30,  8.25
    "Leaf extensions for Y13"   8.29,  8.24
    "Leaf extensions for Y14"   8.29,  8.23
    "Leaf extensions for Y15"   7.91,  7.79
    "Leaf extensions for Y16"   7.50,  7.36
    "Leaf extensions for Y17"   6.50,  6.92
    "Leaf extensions for Y18"   6.68,  6.49
    "Leaf extensions for Y19"   6.27,  6.05
    "Leaf extensions for Y20"   5.86,  5.62
    "Leaf extensions for Y21"   5.45,  5.18
    "Leaf extensions for Y22"   5.04,  4.74
    "Leaf extensions for Y23"   4.63,  4.31
    "Leaf extensions for Y24"  -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y25"  -8.81,  8.81
    "Leaf extensions for Y26"  -8.81,  8.81
    "Compensating filter data as shown above"





9. DIGITAL FILM IMAGES 
This image type supports the exchange of digitized simulation films, digitized 
portal films, on-line portal images, and computed images (i.e. DRR's). The basic 
information to be included is the pixel data itself and identifiers so that one 
image may be distinquished from another when multiple images of the same field 
are used. The pixels themselves are to be transferred in raster order where the 
first pixel is the upper left pixel of the image with the most rapid change in 
position with changing pixel is to the right of the image. The last pixel in the 
image is the lower right.
The film coordinate system is identical to that used for the Beam Geometry 
images with respect to the x and y offsets and axes. The DRR digital film image 
is assumed to be aligned with the unrotated collimator. For example, if the 
pixel image were to be displayed on a monitor with the collimators superimposed, 
the collimator edges would be rotated (relative to the edges of the display) if 
the collimator angle is other than 0 degrees (or a multiple of 90 degrees). If 
DRR's are aligned with the collimator edges, regardless of the collimator 
rotation, the COLLIMATOR ANGLE keyword must be used and its' value must be the 
collimator angle for the associated beam. This angle will be assumed to be zero 
(implying that the film does not rotate with the collimator) unless this keyword 
and appropriate value are used.
There are parameters which may be included in the directory to describe a 
digital film which are designed to define the alignment of the image in the 
associated radiation beam. While these parameters are necessary for any digital 
film image (particularly for DRR's), which does not have either a fiducial grid 
or a port outline on it from which such alignment may be derived, they are not 
generally required for SIMULATOR or PORT image files. Generally, since this 
alignment information is available for DRR images, such alignment data is 
required. The affected keywords are: Grid 1 Units, Grid 2 Units, Source Image 
Distance, X offset, Y offset and Collimator Angle. Where zero (0) is implicit in 
the image data (for instance, DRR's are generally constructed such that the 
central ray is in the geometric center of the pixel image) these keywords are 
not required. For DRR images Grid 1 Units, Grid 2 Units, Source Image Distance 
are required keywords, while the use of X offset, Y offset and Collimator Angle 
depend on the context of the image generation as described with the keyword. 
None of these keywords is required for SIMULATOR or PORT images.
The pixel data is transferred in a fashion similar to the CT pixels, in that 
they may be 16 bit unsigned integer values whose range is restricted to 0 to 
32767 or may be in a range of 0 to 255 for unsigned byte data. The number of 
bits per pixel acutally containing data may be specified in order to facilitate 
the use of local packing and display software.
Since it is possible to have multiple images of the same port in one day, the 
combination of date and film number uniquely identify a film. Generally, the 
film number will be 1, but multiple images of the same port in a day are 
supported through this method.
ADD5: In order to facilitate the exchange of digital film images without having 
an attached beam in a fraction group (for instance a urethrogram film or perhaps 
orthogonal isocenter verification films without corresponding beams in the 
treated fraction groups), the BEAM # and BEAM DESCRIPTION keywords have been 
made optional. The condition to their optional nature is that if they are not 
used, the FILM DESCRIPTION keyword must be used and vice versa.
9.1 Keywords for Images Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #               :=   actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image Type            :=   DIGITAL FILM
    Case #                :=   1 for first case, 2 for second case in
                               file set
    Patient Name          :=   Patient Identifier
   
    Film Number           :=   Number of film on particular date (i.e.
                               1, 2, etc.)
    Film Date             :=   Date digital image acquired (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Film Type             :=   SIMULATOR, DRR, PORT
    Number of Dimensions  :=   2 (always)
    Size of Dimension 1   :=   number of rows
    Size of Dimension 2   :=   number of cols
    Number Representation :=   TWO'S COMPLEMENT INTEGER (for 2 bytes
                               per pixel)  or UNSIGNED BYTE (for 1 byte
                               per pixel)
    Bytes per Pixel       :=   1 or 2 (must index with Number
                               Representation)

Optional Keywords
    Beam #                :=   Beam number in plan of origin (to tie
                               image with) Required if film belongs to a
                               beam in a submitted fraction group.
    Beam Description      :=   Text description of beam generating image
                               Required if film belongs to a beam in a
                               submitted fraction group
    Film Description      :=   Text Description of film
                               Required if BEAM # and BEAM DESCRIPTION
                               keywords not used and must be the same
                               identical string for all appropriate films
                               (i.e. AP ISOCENTER, RT LAT ISOCENTER, etc.)
    Grid 1 Units          :=   pixel width (cm) (required for DRR's)
    Grid 2 Units          :=   pixel length (cm)(required for DRR's)
    Source Image Distance :=   equivalent to TFD (cm)(required for DRR's)
    X Offset              :=   X offset from geometric center of image
                               to central ray of the beam (required
                               for DRR's where central ray is not
                               in geometric center of pixel image)
    Y Offset              :=   Y offset from geometric center of image
                               to central ray of the beam (required
                               for DRR's where central ray is not
                               in geometric center of pixel image)
    Film Source           :=   FILM, ONLINE, COMPUTED
    Unit Number           :=   Unit number film image acquired from
    OD Scale              :=   Scale factor to convert pixel values
                               to optical density
    Bits per Pixel        :=   number of bits actually used for pixel
                               information
    Collimator Angle      :=   collimator angle in degrees (reflects
                               the collimator angle for the associated
                               beam) if the edges of the image are
                               parallel to the collimator edges.
                               This is required only for DRR's which
                               are aligned with the collimator edges
                               and which do not have the portal outline
                               superimposed on the DRR image.  It is
                               not required for DRR's which are aligned
                               with the unrotated collimator or for
                               digitized films or on-line images
                               (SIMULATOR and/or PORT images).

Format of data in the image file:
Binary Data 
9.2 Sample Entries in the Directory 
    Image #               :=    37
    Image Type            :=    DIGITAL FILM
    Case #                :=    1
    Patient Name          :=    Joe Smith
    Beam #                :=    6
    Beam Description      :=    Left Lateral Beam
    Film Date             :=    15,11,1993
    Film Number           :=    1
    Film Type             :=    SIMULATOR
    Number of Dimensions  :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1   :=    480
    Size of Dimension 2   :=    512
    Grid 1 Units          :=    0.215
    Grid 2 Units          :=    0.200
    Source Image Distance :=    140.0
    X Offset              :=    0.0
    Y Offset              :=    2.3
    Number Representation :=    TWO'S COMPLEMENT INTEGER
    Bytes per Pixel       :=    2
    Film Description      :=    verification simulation film
    Film Source           :=    FILM
    
    Image #               :=    38
    Image Type            :=    DIGITAL FILM
    Case #                :=    1
    Patient Name          :=    Joe Smith
    Beam #                :=    6
    Beam Description      :=    Right Lateral Beam
    Film Date             :=    15,11,1993
    Film Number           :=    2
    Film Type             :=    SIMULATOR
    Number of Dimensions  :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1   :=    480
    Size of Dimension 2   :=    512
    Grid 1 Units          :=    0.215
    Grid 2 Units          :=    0.200
    Source Image Distance :=    140.0
    X Offset              :=    0.0
    Y Offset              :=    2.3
    Number Representation :=    UNSIGNED BYTE
    Bytes per Pixel       :=    1
    Film Description      :=    first day port image
    Film Source           :=    ONLINE
    
    Image #               :=    39
    Image Type            :=    DIGITAL FILM
    Case #                :=    1
    Patient Name          :=    Joe Smith
    Film Description      :=    AP Isocenter
    Film Date             :=    15,11,1993
    Film Number           :=    1
    Film Type             :=    SIMULATOR
    Number of Dimensions  :=    2
    Size of Dimension 1   :=    640
    Size of Dimension 2   :=    752
    Number Representation :=    UNSIGNED BYTE
    Bytes per Pixel       :=    1
    Film Source           :=    FILM


9.3 Sample Image of Data for Digital Films 
Data may be in 16-bit, 2's complement, integer representation wherein the 2's 
complement is never really used as the values are required to be in the range of 
0 to 32767. The pixel data may also be in unsigned byte data in which case the 
pixel values are between 0 and 255. Data is in raster order with the first pixel 
being the upper left-hand pixel in the image.



10. DOSE DISTRIBUTIONS 
A dose distribution is the result of a calculation of dose at one or more points 
throughout the patient, for a particular configuration of beams - that is, for a 
particular "plan". Although in general, one might calculate doses on a 
completely irregular grid of points this is rarely done in practice and the 
proposed format is for a fairly regular grid, namely one in which a two 
dimensional array of points is defined in one or more parallel planes. This 
format naturally accommodates the computation of doses on a 2-D array of points 
in each CT scan, and recognizes that such scans may not be at equally spaced 
intervals. It permits the transfer of dose calculations throughout a volume, or 
in a single plane - or, indeed, along a line or at a single point. Planes may be 
other than parallel with the scan sections however, thus supporting calculations 
in sagittal or coronal planes. At present planes oblique to the major axes of 
the scans, or arbitrarily located points of calculation are not supported.
The points at which the doses are defined are assigned coordinates within the 
Patient Coordinate System. We first describe the coordinate definitions for the 
case of arrays defined in planes parallel to transverse sections (i.e. CT 
scans), and then indicate some differences when the planes are sagittal or 
coronal. The number of planes (>=1) and a list of the z-values is specified. 
Within a plane a rectangular array of points is defined by specifying the x, y 
coordinates of the upper left hand corner point (as viewed from the patient's 
feet), the x and y increments per point, and the number of points along the 
x-axis and along the y-axis. The z values for each plane may be unequally spaced 
and are therefor individually specified. For transverse planes these z values 
would normally be identical to those of some or all of the CT sections, but this 
is not required. The order of the planes should be that of increasing value of 
z.
To preserve the integrity of the right-handed cartesian coordinate system, some 
sign conventions must be obeyed when sagittal or coronal planes are used. The 
coordinates for single planes as presented to the observer are as follows:
 
Figure 10.1 
These sign conventions have implications for the various parameters as follows:
      PARAMETER TRANS. SAG. COR. 
      (Horiz, vert) coords of points x, y z, y x, z 
      Usual signs of coords of ULH corner -, + +, + -, - 
      Usual sign of horizontal increment + - + 
      Usual sign of vertical increment - - + 
      Coordinate associated with plane change z x y 

Note that these conventions need not be obeyed in the definition of pixel size 
of CT scans. The vertical size is permitted to be positive for CT scans to 
conform to conventional usage and is interpreted as the absolute value of the 
pixel height, rather than a signed increment.
The units in which doses are given are up to the originator of the data. They 
must be in absolute dose units such as Gray. Relative and Percent are no longer 
supported in the Dose Units keyword and are now implicit by the inclusion of the 
Dose Scale keyword, where the Dose Scale keyword is used only if scaling is 
necessary. The dose values in the image file are multiplied by the Dose Scale 
value to obtain the Dose Units specified. A 1.00 is assumed for the Dose Scale 
value unless it is explicitly stated with the Dose Scale keyword.
Dose distributions other than Physical dose, such as of Effective dose, LET, OER 
or dose uncertainty, are supported through the use of the "Dose Type" keyword.
The Fraction Group ID allows multiple dose distributions to be submitted which 
will allow for fractionation information to be extracted for both targets and 
normal tissues and is used to tie Beam Geometry files to a particular dose file 
(multiple Beam Geometry files may point to the same DOSE file through the 
Fraction Group ID). All beams contributing dose to this distribution shall have 
an identical Fraction Group ID in their beam geometry specification.
The Plan ID of Origin is similar to the Fraction Group ID except that instead of 
being used to tie beam files to the dose file, it is used to tie Seed Geometry 
files to a Dose file.  Unlike the Fraction Group ID, there can only be one Seed 
Geometry file which points at a given dose file (i.e. there is a one-to-one 
correspondence).
While both the Fraction Group ID and Plan ID of Origin keywords are listed as 
optional, when used for RTOG 3D CRT protocol patients, they are required as 
appropriate.
TEXT (ASCII) DOSE SPECIFICATION
The data storage in a dose image is "defined" through the example given in 
Section 10.3. The data are placed in the buffer in the following order:
Number of planes (e.g. 19)
Z-coordinate of first constant z plane (for e.g. z = -120.556)
A sequence of real numbers representing the dose at each grid point at this z 
value. X value (dimension 1) varies faster: 
     0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000
     4.641,   11.785,   12.031,   10.608,   10.324,   10.258,   10.202
    10.139,   10.125,   10.125,   10.118,    0.000,    0.000,   10.117
    10.132,   10.148,   10.145,   10.145,   10.151,   10.183,   10.234

Z-coordinate of second constant z plane (for e.g. z = -119.616)
A sequence of real numbers representing the dose at each grid point at this z 
value. X value (dimension 1) varies faster: 
     0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000,    0.000
     2.011,    9.881,   11.476,   10.608,   10.324,   10.258,   10.202
    10.139,   10.125,   10.125,   10.118,    0.000,    0.000,   10.117

BINARY DOSE SPECIFICATION
Doses may also be conveyed in a more succinct, binary format. In order to 
facilitate this format several additional (otherwise optional) keywords must be 
specified. Doses using the binary format must meet the following requirements: 
  axial dose plane spacing (along Z axist) must be uniform 
  the dose values are in two's complement integer format restricted to the 
  positive domain (same as CT pixel values) 
  the DOSE SCALE keyword must be used with the appropriate value stated which 
  yields the appropriate dose values (with units) when the matrix values are 
  multiplied by the DOSE SCALE value 
  the COORD 3 OF FIRST POINT and DEPTH GRID INTERVAL keywords specifying the 
  smallest (or most negative) Z coordinate and the step between each of the SIZE 
  DIMENSION 3 planes must be specified 
The optional keywords required for binary dose specification may not be usedwith 
text dose specification. The order of the dose matrix elements is identical to 
that used for the text representation excepting that the Z coordinate is no 
longer specified (nor is the plane count). As with all binary files, no text is 
supported in the file (e.g. comments in quotes).
10.1 Keywords for Images Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                    :=   actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image Type                 :=   DOSE
    Case #                     :=   1 for first patient, 2 for second
                                    patient, etc
    Patient Name               :=   patient identifier
   
    Dose Units                 :=   GRAYS, RADS, CGYS
    Orientation of Dose        :=   TRANSVERSE
    Number Representation      :=   CHARACTER
    Number of Dimensions       :=   3
    Size of dimension 1        :=   # horizontal points (>=1)
    Size of dimension 2        :=   # vertical points (>=1)
    Size of dimension 3        :=   # of planes (>=1)
    Coord 1 of first point     :=   x coord (cm) for transverse, etc.
    Coord 2 of first point     :=   y coord (cm) for transverse, etc.
    Horizontal grid interval   :=   delta-x (cm) for transverse (>0)
    Vertical grid interval     :=   delta-y (cm) for transverse (<0)

Optional Keywords
    Dose #                     :=   # identifying this distribution
    Dose Type                  :=   PHYSICAL, EFFECTIVE, LET, OER, ERROR
    Unit #                     :=
    Writer                     :=
    Date written               :=   date (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Dose description           :=   free text
    Dose edition               :=
    Plan # of origin           :=
    Plan edition of origin     :=
    Study # of origin          :=
    Version # of program       :=   planning program identification
    x coord of normalizn point :=   cm
    y coord of normalizn point :=   cm
    z coord of normalizn point :=   cm
    Dose at normalizn point    :=   should result in units specified
                                    above after being multiplied by
                                    the Dose Scale
    Dose error                 :=   NOMINAL, MINIMUM, or MAXIMUM
                                    (for dose range submissions)
    Fraction Group ID          :=   ID grouping beams of common
                                    fraction for the doses in this
                                    image file
    Number of Tx               :=   Number of times this fraction
                                    (Fraction Group ID) treated to
                                    achieve total doses in this file
    Dose Scale                 :=   Scale factor to convert doses in
                                    image file to absolute doses in
                                    the units specified in the Dose Units.
                                    (assumed to be 1.00 if not specified)
    Coord 3 of first point     :=   z coord (cm) for first transverse plane
    Depth grid interval        :=   delta-z (cm) between each subsequent
                                    transverse dose plane (>0)
    Plan ID of origin           :=  Plan ID of SEED GEOMETRY to required to tie
                                    DOSE file to SEED GEOMETRY file

All coordinates and differences are expressed in centimeters in the patient 
coordinate system.
Format of data in the image:
ASCII text. 
10.2 Sample Entries in the Directory 
    Image #                  :=    57
    Image Type               :=    DOSE
    Case #                   :=    1
    Patient Name             :=    CHEST1C
    Dose #                   :=    1
    Dose Type                :=    PHYSICAL
    Dose Units               :=    GRAYS
    Orientation of Dose      :=    TRANSVERSE
    Number Representation    :=    CHARACTER
    Number of Dimensions     :=    3
    Size of dimension 1      :=    116
    Size of dimension 2      :=    74
    Size of dimension 3      :=    101
    Coord 1 of first point   :=    -19.3000
    Coord 2 of first point   :=    14.3000
    Horizontal grid interval :=    0.3000
    Vertical grid interval   :=    -0.3000
    Dose description         :=    4FLD CHESTWALL WITH BOLUS
    Plan # of origin         :=    26
    Fraction Group ID        :=    1
    Number of Tx             :=    25
    Dose Scale               :=    0.01

10.3 Sample Image of Text Data for Dose 
   "Number of planes is "  101
   "Z-coordinate is  " -15.200
      0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.012,  0.012,  0.013,  0.013
      0.014,  0.015,  0.016,  0.016,  0.017,  0.018,  0.019,  0.019
      0.020,  0.021,  0.022,  0.022,  0.023,  0.024,  0.024,  0.025
      0.026,  0.026,  0.027,  0.028,  0.028,  0.029,  0.029,  0.030
      0.030,  0.031,  0.031,  0.032,  0.032,  0.032,  0.033,  0.033
      0.033,  0.033,  0.033,  0.033,  0.033,  0.033,  0.033,  0.033
      0.033,  0.032,  0.032,  0.032,  0.031,  0.031,  0.031,  0.030
        .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
        .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
        .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
      0.030,  0.029,  0.029,  0.028,  0.027,  0.027,  0.026,  0.026
      0.025,  0.024,  0.024,  0.023,  0.022,  0.021,  0.021,  0.020
      0.019,  0.018,  0.018,  0.017,  0.016,  0.015,  0.014,  0.014
   "Z-coordinate is  " -15.000 
      0.013,  0.013,  0.012,  0.012,  0.011,  0.011,  0.011,  0.010
      0.010,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000
      0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000
        .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
        .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
        .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
      0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000
      0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000,  0.000
      0.012,  0.012,  0.013,  0.013,  0.014,  0.015,  0.015,  0.016
      0.017,  0.018,  0.019,  0.019,  0.020,  0.021,  0.022,  0.022
      0.023,  0.024,  0.024,  0.025,  0.026,  0.026,  0.027,  0.027

10.4 Sample Image of Binary Data for Dose
ADD6: The data file for binary formatted dose data consists of two byte integer 
values restricted to the values from 0 to 32767 packed with the most significant 
byte first (identical to the numeric format used for CT scans) written in raster 
order for each axial dose plane. Each subsequent axial plane's dose values are 
required to be in order of increasing Z coordinate. Any padding required for 
buffering (for tape writing only) is required only after the last dose point of 
the last axial plane is written to the file.



11. DOSE-VOLUME HISTOGRAMS 
Dose-volume histograms (DVH) provide a "pre-digestion" of the doses provided in 
a 3-D dose distribution with corresponding anatomic structures. While there are 
several different methods which may be used to display the DVH data, the 
underlying data is the same: A bin of dose range and a volume associated with 
the dose range. DVH's are transferred as one structure per image file.
The data in the image file itself is simply an array of doublets where the first 
value in the doublet is the lower end of the dose bin and the second value is 
the volume associated with the dose bin. The doses may be in either absolute 
dose or percent dose and may be converted back and forth using directory 
information. The volume may be in units of percent or of cubic centimeter (cc) 
and may be converted back and forth with the additional information available in 
the directory information for the image file. The dose bins are required to be 
uniformly spaced and included in the data file from zero dose to the highest 
dose for which any non-zero volume is identified and no gaps are allowed.
The scaling of relative or percent doses or volumes are performed by multiplying 
the relative dose or volume value by the appropriate scale value.
11.1 Keywords for Dose-Volume Histograms Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                :=   actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image Type             :=   DOSE VOLUME HISTOGRAM
    Case #                 :=   1 for first case, 2 for second case
                                in file set
    Patient Name           :=   Patient Identifier

    Structure Name         :=   name of structure
    Dose Units             :=   GRAYS, CGYS, RADS
    Dose Type              :=   ABSOLUTE, PERCENT, RELATIVE
    Volume Type            :=   ABSOLUTE, PERCENT, RELATIVE
    Number of Pairs        :=   Number of dose/volume pairs in image
                                file
    Maximum # Pairs        :=   Maximum number of dose/volume pairs
                                allowed
    Number Representation  :=   CHARACTER
    Plan ID of Origin      :=   ID of plan DVH's calculated from.
                                Indexes with beams and dose
                                distributions.

Optional Keywords
    Dose Scale             :=   Scales percent or relative dose to
                                absolute dose (Required if dose type
                                is not ABSOLUTE)
    Volume Scale           :=   Scales percent or relative volume
                                to cc's (Required if volume type is
                                not ABSOLUTE)
    Date of DVH            :=   Date DVH calculated (DD, MM, YYYY)

Format of data in the image file:
ASCII TEXT 
11.2 Example of Dose-Volume Histogram Directory Entries 
    Image #                :=    39
    Image Type             :=    DOSE VOLUME HISTOGRAM
    Case #                 :=    1
    Patient Name           :=    Joe Smith
    Structure Name         :=    Rectum
    Plan ID of Origin      :=    final
    Dose Units             :=    GRAYS
    Dose Type              :=    ABSOLUTE
    Volume Type            :=    RELATIVE
    Volume Scale           :=    203.1
    Number of Pairs        :=    100
    Maximum # Pairs        :=    1001
    Number Representation  :=    CHARACTER
    Date of DVH            :=    15,11,1993
    
    Image #                :=    40
    Image Type             :=    DOSE VOLUME HISTOGRAM
    Case #                 :=    1
    Patient Name           :=    Joe Smith
    Structure Name         :=    PTV
    Plan ID of Origin      :=    final
    Dose Units             :=    GRAYS
    Dose Type              :=    ABSOLUTE
    Volume Type            :=    RELATIVE
    Volume Scale           :=    203.1
    Number of Pairs        :=    100
    Maximum # Pairs        :=    1001
    Number Representation  :=    CHARACTER
    Date of DVH            :=    15,11,1993

11.3 Example of Dose-Volume Histogram Image File 
    "Minimum Bin Dose,  Fractional Volume"
      0.00, 0.05
      1.00, 0.00
      2.00, 0.06
       . . . .
       . . . .
       . . . .
    100.00, 0.00

Note that the volume associated with each bin dose is that volume which 
explicitly falls into that dose bin (hence the zero volume values for 1.00 Gy 
above sandwiched between the 0.00 Gy and 2.00 Gy bins.



12. SEED GEOMETRY 
Seed geometry files are used to convey the geometric distribution of permanently 
implanted I125 or Pd103 seeds.  These seed distributions may be indexed with an 
image data set (CT, MRI or Ultrasound), or may be independent of any image set.  
The information provided in this file should be adequate to calculate the dose 
distribution with minimal modification of the incoming data by the receiving 
institution.   Multiple seed distributions are only supported in a single file 
set if they comprise the complete implant in which varying seed activities 
and/or types are used in the same implant.
NOTE: It is assumed that if any image files (CT/MR/US) are contained within the 
same digital file set, that the seed coordinates are consistent with the 
coordinates of the images (i.e. the seeds are registered with the image set).  
If there are no images with which the seed coordinates are registered, then no 
image files are allowed to be provided in the same digital file set.  This is to 
simplify the specification of registered versus unregistered seed coordinates.
The fundamental information contained in the directory entries for a Seed 
Geometry file are: 
  Free text identification of the seed model and/or manufacturer to be able to 
  distinguish between the differing characteristics of seeds of various 
  manufacture; 
  The isotope for the seeds (restricted to I125 or PD103 for this version of the 
  exchange; 
  The strength of the seeds on the day of implant (all seeds are expected to 
  have the same activity +/- the deviation of the batch; 
  The units of seed strength specified; 
  The date of the implant; 
  The number of seeds identified in the implant (note that these numbers may 
  differ from pre-plan to post-plan); 
  A plan ID string to differentiate pre- and post-plans. 
The data file associated with the directory entries consists of only coordinate 
triplets (in cm) for each of the number of seeds specified in ASCII (text) 
format.
12.1 Keywords for Seed Geometry Used in Directory 
Required Keywords
    Image #                :=   actual image (file) number (see 4.4)
    Image Type             :=   SEED GEOMETRY
    Case #                 :=   1 (or registered case number)
    Patient Name           :=   Patient Identifier

    Seed Model             :=   model identifier or manufacturer of seed
    Isotope                :=   I125 or PD103
    Seed Strength          :=   value corresponding to strength units specified
    Strength Units         :=   MCI or CGYCM2PERHR
    Date of Implant        :=   date (DD, MM, YYYY)
    Number of Seeds        :=   Number of seeds in image file (implant)
    Number Representation  :=   CHARACTER (format of data in data file)
    Plan ID of Origin      :=   ID of plan seed distribution from
                                Indexes with dose distributions.
Format of data in the image file:
ASCII TEXT 
12.2 Example of Seed Geometry Directory Entries 
    Image #                :=   42
    Image Type             :=   SEED GEOMETRY
    Case #                 :=   1
    Patient Name           :=   Joe Smith

    Seed Model             :=   6711
    Isotope                :=   I125
    Seed Strength          :=   0.43
    Strength Units         :=   MCI
    Date of Implant        :=   23, 06, 1999
    Number of Seeds        :=   27
    Number Representation  :=   CHARACTER
    Plan ID of Origin      :=   Preplan
 
    Image #                :=   44
    Image Type             :=   SEED GEOMETRY
    Case #                 :=   1
    Patient Name           :=   Joe Smith
    Seed Model             :=   Model 2
    Isotope                :=   I125
    Seed Strength          :=   0.38
    Strength Units         :=   MCI
    Date of Implant        :=   23, 06, 1999
    Number of Seeds        :=   63
    Number Representation  :=   CHARACTER
    Plan ID of Origin      :=   Actual Plan

12.3 Example of Seed Geometry Image File 
    "          X (cm),  Y (cm),  Z (cm)"
    "Seed #1"    0.00,    0.05,    5.00
    "Seed #2"    0.00,    0.05,    5.90
    "Seed #3"    0.00,    0.05,    7.20
    "Seed #4"    0.00,    0.05,    8.10
       . . . .
       . . . . (intervening 80 seeds not shown)
       . . . .
    "Seed #85"    3.00,    3.25,   4.70




Document maintained by William B. Harms, Sr. and Walter R. Bosch
Last modified: 11/04/1999 11:30:57 
